---
title: Maxwell Equations
tags: mathcs, appliedmath, physics
---

$Div(F) =\nabla \cdot F$  
$Curl(F) =\nabla \times F$


# Div
Assume given a vector field $F$

Positive = source  
Negative = sink  


* $Div(F,(x,y))$ means Divergence of field F at point (x,y). 
* Draw a circle at (x,y) in vector field
  * Fluid moving out Circle > Fluid moving in Circle
    * Positive
  * Fluid moving in Circle > Fluit moving out Circle
    * Negative

Incompressible fluid like water has Divergence = 0 everywhere.
Divergence = 0 implies no source or sinks.


# Curl

How much fluid rotates around a point.

postive = Clockwise 
negative = Counterclockwise 

Uni-directional vector field, imagine a vertical piece of wood, if vector field is stronger on top than bottom it will make it spin clockwise.


# Maxwell Eq

$Div(E) = \frac{\rho}{\epsilon_0}$  

* Divergence of electric field is correlated to charge density.
  * Electric field has a source like effect when charge is positive.
  * Electric field has a sink like effect when charge is negative.


$Div(B) = 0$

* magnetic field is incompressible like water
* magnetic field have no source nor sinks
  * The north-south pole magnet effect is created a pair of clockwise and counter clockwise flow.


$Curl(E) = -\frac{dB}{dt}$
A closed circuit denoted by the Curl of E will be induced a current when magnetic field changes.
A magnetic field will be induced when current is running through a closed circuit.

$Curl(B) = \mu_{0}(J + \epsilon_{0}\frac{dE}{dt})$


# Practical

A magnetic field is just an electric field from a different frame of reference.

Energy doesn't JUST flow through wires in a circuit. The circuit has a electric-magnetic field that allows energy to flow in space and converge to the target.


