---
title: Circuits
tags: mathcs, physics, appliedmath
---

# Current

* Amount of Charge at a point in time is $q(t)$
* Current is $q'(t)$ or $\frac{dq}{dt}$


# Circuits

* Voltage has no meaning without a reference point <- reason for grounding circuits
* Voltage only has meaning when you say the voltage **across a resistor**  
This means the potential difference before passing and after passing the resistor is the Voltage.  

## Series

* Voltage varies, Total voltage is sum of Voltage across all resistors
* Resistance varies, Total resistance is sum
* Current is same everywhere


## Parallel

* Voltage is same when passing each resistor in parallel
* Inverse(total resistance) = Inverse(sum resistors)
* Current is sum

# Ohm's law and Reality

## Real life power sources

How does Ohm's law play in reality?  

* In reality, electronics has a pre-determined static resistance.  
* Voltage is supplied by a power adapter which is semi-static since we get to choose the power adapter.  
* Voltage and current are linked.  
  * high voltage power supply, you get a high current.  
  * low voltage power supply, you get a low current.
<!--  -->
* A power adapter shows : 
  * INPUT: 100-120V
  * OUTPUT: 5V , 1.2A  
* This means the house power socket, (typically 120 Volts) is input into the power adapter and reduces the voltage.  
* The  1.2A just means the adapter maximum internals can only take 1.2 Amps 
  * This means if we use the power adapter on a very low resistance electronic device, the power adapter may break.
  * This DOES NOT mean the adapter *provides* current.  

 power adapter will provide different current to different electronic devices but it will always provide the same voltage.

 ## Battery doesnt follow ohm's law

 * Ohm's law only apply to resistors in a circuit
 * Battery is classified as a **Voltage Source** - a fixed voltage in a circuit
   * To find this fixed voltage : $E = E_Cathode - E_Anode$ where $E=Voltage$
   * Cathode: area of reduction reaction 
   * Anode: area of oxidation reaction

Chemical chart maps oxidation and reduction reaction to voltages.  
Use this to calculate total volts of a battery.  

 ## Does current or voltage kill

>  It isn't Volt that kills, it's current  
>  Standing on the cliff doesn't kill, it's the fall  

The above quote is an abuse of language, since Current is basically Voltage-in-action.    
