---
title: Quick C
tags: prog, C, QuickCode, OS
---

Remember  pointers always hold an address so if you're reading some spec,  
replace pointer with address if it gets confusing.

> function bleh that takes a pointer can be read as this function is directly accessing or modifying the object 


# Basics




standard library is nested in angled brackets like \<iostream\> \<stdio.h\>

```C
#include <stdio.h>

int b = 5;
int *a = &b;
printf("address of pointee b aka value of a is %p  \n", a);
printf("value of pointee is b  \n", *(int*)(a));
//address of pointee b aka value of a is 0xbefe3588
//value of pointee b is 5 

printf("An int is %d, A long is %ld, a float is %f, a double is %lf, a char is %c, a string is %s, a pointer is %p",12,25555555,23.1,23.01,'c',"asd",a)
```
|printf |keywords|
|--- | --- |
|%c | char |
|%s | string |
|%d,%ld | int,long|
|%f | float |
|%lf | double |
|%p | pointer value aka address of pointee|
| %x | convert unsigned number to hex   |
| %o |  convert unsigned number to octal | 



# MACROS 

```C
#ifndef two
#define two 2
#endif
int a = two;
```
ifndef tells us if not defined then define it else skip it.

`#define MAX(a,b) a > b ? a : b`{.c}

---

# Example linking multiple object files

```{.c filename=main.c}
#include <stdio.h>
#include "helper.h"
#ifndef two
#define two 2
#endif

int main(){
    int a = two;
    printf("hey %d ", plus(a,3));
    return 0;

}
```

```{.c filename=helper.h}
#ifndef avoidRepeatImport
#define avoidRepeatImport

int plus(int a, int b);

#endif
```
```{.c filename=helper.c}
#include "helper.h"

int plus(int a, int b){
    return a + b;
}
```


Below, the "-c" flag tells us to convert helper.c to helper.o
```bash
gcc -c helper.c #outputs helper.o
gcc -c main.c #outputs main.o
gcc main.o helper.o -o myexecutable
./myexecutable
```

Alternatively we can just do
```bash
gcc main.c helper.c -o myexecutable -Wall
./myexecutable    
```

# makefile

* "make" is analogous to "npm build"  
* "makefile" is analogous to "package.json"  

On Vscode bottom right click on Spaces and turn to tab.  
make requires tab before gcc command.
```bash
cat -e -t -v makefile #Use to check for tabs ^I
```

```bash
make #this will build the makefile
```

```bash
all: run
	gcc main.o 
	./a.out
run: main.c
	gcc -c main.c
clean:
	rm a.out main.o
```

```bash
all: main.o helper.o
	gcc main.o helper.o -o myexecutable

main.o: main.c helper.h
	gcc -c main.c

helper.o: helper.c helper.h
	gcc -c helper.c

clean:
	rm helper.o main.o myexecutable
```	


* the all keyword will always run.
  * all: main.o ...
  * therefore the make will go to  
  main.o main.o: \<Dependency1\> \<Dependency2\>...


# null pointers, structs

* uninitialized base variables and pointer are both `NULL` when read
* uninitalized struct are also `NULL` when read
* but **members of uninitalized struct variables have random value** and addresses(if the member is a pointer)
* **but members of uninitalized struct pointers always give seg fault**

```C
struct ll {
    int var;
    struct* ll next;
}

struct ll newlist;
printf("%d",newlist); // 0
printf("%p",newlistptr); // (nil)

printf("%d",newlist.next); // 1824314
printf("%p",newlistptr.next); // 0x294452u205

struct ll* newlistptr;
printf("%d",newlistptr); // 0
printf("%p",newlistptr); // (nil)

printf("%d",(*newlistptr).next); // segfault
printf("%p",(*newlistptr).next); // segfault
```

# Strings

* Strings are really just arrays of chars
  * array of chars are pointers
  * Strings are pointers
* last entry of string is either 0 or '\0'

#### String literals are immutable in memory

* Typing a string like "hello" in your code editor means your progam will allocate a permanent address and memory for "hello" that all other
"hello" in your code will refer to.
```c
printf("%s","hello"); 
//init string literal "hello" at SOME address 
//0xfffeee -> "hello"

printf("%s","hello"); 
//REUSE same string literal at SAME address
//0xfffeee -> "hello"
```

#### Different ways to init String

```c
char s[256];
//MUTABLE array of 256 initialized.

char s[256] = "hello";
s[1]='Y';
//RHS: immutable string literal "hello" is initialized
//LHS: MUTABLE array s of 256 initialized.
//Copies string( and Auto appends a terminating \0) 
//RESULT: "hello\0" MUTABLE

char s[] = "hello";
s[1]='Y';
//RHS: immutable string literal "hello" is initialized
//LHS: automatically initialized 8 bytes MUTABLE array s.
//Copies string(and Auto append a terminating \0) 
//RESULT: "hello\0" MUTABLE

char *s = "hello";
*(s+1)='Y'; //Crash trying to change 'e' => 'Y'
//RHS: immutable string literal "hello" is initialized
//LHS: s POINTS to IMMUTABLE string
//We Crash for trying to modify an immutable string literal
```

---

### Dynamic mem allocation

malloc(size_t x)
allocates x bytes of heap memory
return address for x
return a void pointer, void *
int *a;
a = malloc(5 * sizeof(int));


free(void * p)
release dynamically allocated memory
input: pointer[aka address] to the beginning of a dynamically allocated block of memory

calloc(size_t n, size_t x)
basically just malloc with n*x bytes of memory

realloc(void *p, size_t x)
p must point to beginning of block
reallocate memory to x size.


GDB
must compile with -g 
gcc -g ...
gdb someprogram

run



file functions
<fcntl.h>
open
add a . file to file table 	returns file descriptor
if open fails => -1

open(path,flags, mode)
* mode - basically file permission like 777
  * used in file creation 
* flags - what to do with file
  * O_RDONLY
  * O_WRONLY
  * O_RDWR
  * O_CREAT
 
<sys/stat.h>
umask 
set file creation for all files;
umask(777); //gives all new file that will be created full permission

<unistd.h>
read data from file
read(filename, buffer , size)
read size bytes from filename into buffer

<unistd.h>
write(filename,buffer,size)

<unistd.h>
lseek
set current position in open file
lseek(file_descriptor, offset,whence)
* offset - number of bytes to move position by, (-inf,inf)
* whence - where to measure offset from
  * SEEK_SET - beginning of file
  * SEEK_CUR - current position in file
  * SEEK)END - end of file

<sys/stat.h>
stat(path , stat_buffer )
get information about a file


DIRECTORIES

<dirent.h>
opendir 
*Open a directory file
opendir( path);
 returns a pointer to a directory stream typed "DIR *"
 
closedir(dir_stream)
  closes directory stream and frees the pointer 
  
readdir(dir_stream)
	returns pointer to next entry in a directory stream or NULL if all entries have already been returned.
	
rewinddir(DIR * d)
	
	resets directory stream of d to the beginngin
 

INPUT OUTPUT
int main( int argc, char *argv[] )
argc - number of command line args
argv - array of command line args as strings

stdin input 
<stdio.h>
fgets(char * s, int size, FILE * f)
reads size-1 characters fomr file stream f and stores it in s and appends NULL.
stops at newline, EOF.
File stream has type "FILE *"
	* more complex than file descriptor
	*stdin is a universal FILE * variable
fgets(s,100 stdin);


Signals

kill(pid,signal)

sighandler is basically a callback function you define.
static void sighandler (int signo )
intercept signals in a c program, cannot catch SIGKILL,SIGSTOP

signal(SIGNUMBER, sighandler) 
attach a signal to a signal handling function 

static void sighandler(int signo){
if (signo ==  SIGUSR1 )
printf("YO");
}
signal(SIGUSR1,sighandler);



Exec - c functions that run other proc or replace current proc with anothe proc
<unistd.h>

execl(path, command ,arg0, arg1 .. )


execlp(path, command, arg0,arg1 ..)
same as execlp but uses $PATH environment variables



Managing Sub-processes

<unistd.h>
fork()

<sys/wait.h>
wait(status)
stops parent process until child exited
return pid of child  exited 
* status
  * WIFEEXITED - true if exit normally
  * WEXITSTATUS - return value of child
  * WIFSIGNALED - true if exit with signal
  * WTERMSIG - signal number intercepted  dby child

waidpid(pid,status,options)
wait for specific child



Redirection
<unistd.h>
dup2(fd1,fd2)
 * redirects fd2 to fd1



Pipes
A conduit between 2 separate processes on the same computer.
Pipes have 2 ends, a read end and a write end.
Pipes act just like files (i.e. you can read() and write() to send any kind of data).
Pipes exist in memory.
Unnamed Pipes
Unnamed pipes have no external identifier.
pipe - <unistd.h>
Create an unnamed pipe.
Returns 0 if the pipe was created, -1 if not.
pipe( descriptors )
descriptors
Array that will contain the descriptors for each end of the pipe. Must be an int array of size 2.
descriptors[0] is the read end.
descriptors[1] is the write end.
example
int fds[2];
pipe( fds );
char line[100];
f = fork();
if (f == 0) {
  close( fds[0] );
  write( fds[1], "hello!", 7);
}
else {
  close( fds[1] );
  read( fds[0], line, sizeof(line) );
}
Named Pipes
Also known as FIFOs.
Same as unnamed pipes except FIFOs have a name that can be used to identify them via different programs.
Like unnamed pipes, FIFOS are unidirectional.
mkfifo
Shell command to make a FIFO
$ mkfifo name
mkfifo - <sys/types.h> <sys/stat.h>
c function to create a FIFO
Returns 0 on success and -1 on failure
Once created, the FIFO acts like a regular file, and we can use open, read, write, and close on it.
FIFOs will block on open until both ends of the pipe have a connection.
mkfifo( name, permissions )





Shared Memory
<sys/shm.h> <sys/ipc.h> <sys/types.h>
A segment of heap memory that can be accessed by multiple processes.
Shared memory is accessed via a key that is known by any process that needs to access it.
Shared memory does not get released when a program exits.`

* 5 Shared memory operations
 * Create the segment (happens once) - shmget
 * Access the segment (happens once per process) - shmget
 * Attach the segment to a variable (once per process) - shmat
 * Detach the segment from a variable (once per process) - shmdt
 * Remove the segment (happens once) - shmctl

```C
int *data;
int shmd;
shmd = shmget(KEY, sizeof(int), IPC_CREAT | 0640);
printf("shmd: %d\n", shmd);
data = shmat(shmd, 0, 0);
printf("data: %p\n", data);
printf("*data: %d\n", *data);
*data = * data + 10;
printf("*data: %d\n", *data);
shmdt(data); 
```


Server Design
* Handshake - ensure a connection between 2 programs

* 3-way-handshake - verify both client and server can BOTH SEND AND RECIEVE DATA
 * Client send msg to Server. (lets server know client can recieve data)
  * NOTE: At this point Server DOES NOT KNOW if client can send data  
 * Server send resp to Client. (Let client know Server can recieve and send data)
 * Client send resp to Server. (lets server know client can recieve and send data) 

Setup

* Server creates a FIFO (Well Known Pipe) and waits for a connection.
 * Client creates a “private” FIFO.
sprintf(buffer, "%d", getpid() );

Handshake

* Client connects to server and sends the private FIFO name. 
* Client waits for a response from the server.
* Server receives client’s message and removes the WKP.
* Server connects to client FIFO, sending an initial acknowledgement message.
* Client receives server’s message, removes its private FIFO.
* Client sends response to server.

Operation

* Server and client send information back and forth.

Reset

* Client exits, server closes any connections to the client.
* Server recreates the WKP waits for another client.